PDS_VERSION_ID        = PDS3
RECORD_TYPE           = STREAM
OBJECT                = TEXT
  INTERCHANGE_FORMAT    = ASCII
  PUBLICATION_DATE      = 2000-06-14
  NOTE                  = "N/A"
END_OBJECT            = TEXT

END





    Multimission Software Interface Specification (SIS)








SPICE
C-Matrix Kernel

CK




NAIF Document No. 370
Version 1.0



Prepared by:  C. Acton
Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility (NAIF)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
National Aeronautics and Space Administration



PURPOSE:  This SIS describes the format and content of SPICE C-matrix Kernel
(CK) file, used to provide orientation of a spacecraft or any articulating
structure.



CHANGE LOG

Version    Date          Page Nos.    Reason
1.0      14 June 2000     All        New multimission version.














List of Acronyms


ANSI    American National Standards Institute
ASCII    American Standard Code for Information Interchange
CCSDS    Consultative Committee on Space Data Standards
CK    SPICE C-kernel
ET    Ephemeris Time
FK    SPICE Frames Kernel
FTP    File Transfer Protocol
JPL    Caltech/Jet Propulsion Laboratory
MSOO    Mars Surveyor Operations Office
NAIF    Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility
PDB    Project Data Base
PDS    Planetary Data System
SCLK    SPICE Spacecraft Clock Kernel
SFDU    Standard Formatted Data Unit
SIS    Software Interface Specification
SPICE    S-, P-, I-, C- and E-kernels; the principal logical data components
      of a particular NASA ancillary information system
TMOD    Telecommunications and Mission Operations Directorate




Section 1
General Description


1.1    Purpose of Document

This Software Interface Specification (SIS) describes the purpose of
a SPICE C-matrix Kernel (CK) file and SPICE Toolkit software available
to work with CK files..


1.2    Scope

This is a multimission SIS, applicable for all flight projects.


1.3    Applicable Documents
 
No.   Document ID        Version           Title
1. NAIF Doc. No. 174   Latest release   C-kernel Required Reading
2. NAIF Doc. No. 358   Latest release   Quaternions: Standard NAIF 
Conventions
3. NAIF Doc. No. 214   Latest release   Rotations Required Reading
4. NAIF Doc. No. 167   Latest release   DAF Required Reading
5. NAIF Doc. No. 222   Latest release   SCLK Required Reading


1.4     Functional Description

A C-kernel holds orientation information, and optionally angular rate data, 
for a named structure relative to a specified reference frame. In particular,
a CK file contains time-tagged quaternions that specify the rotation from a 
base reference frame to a "target" frame fixed to the spacecraft of other 
structure for which orientation information is being given. Optionally 
(option to the CK producer) the CK file may contain angular velocity of the 
target frame relative to the base frame.

A CK may be a "predict" file, describing the planned orientation of a 
structure, or it may be a "reconstruction" file, providing the actual 
(measured) orientation of a structure, generally based on data returned from 
sensors associated with that structure.

Reference Document No. 2 provides detailed descriptions of quaternions as 
used within SPICE and as specified in other areas. Reference Document Nos.2 
and 3 describe how these quaternions are used in rotation matrices.


1.4.1    Data Source, Destinations, and Transfer Method

C-kernels are made available to flight projects through whatever mechanism is
used for providing access to SPICE products, such as a Project Database 
(PDB), a File Interchange System (FIS) or a SPICE Server.



1.4.2    Labeling and Identification

CK files may include identification information within an internal "comment 
area.", although this is not a hard requirement. CK file names may utilize 
any syntax picked by a flight project, although limiting the length to the 
"27.3" specification adopted by the Planetary Data System (PDS) is suggested.
NAIF further suggests using the "*.bc" and "*.xc" standard generally used by 
NAIF.

Section 2
Data Object Definition


2.1    Structure and Organization

In normal use CK files are binary files, consisting of a "comment area" 
provided to hold metadata, and the data area, holding quaternions, optional 
angular velocity, and the infrastructure used to organize these. CK files are
specific instances of an underlying data structure named Double Precision 
Array File (DAF), which is described in great detail in Reference 4.
To port binary CK files between machines that do not use the same binary 
standard the SPICE "transfer format" is utilized. In a transfer format file 
CK data re encoded in a hexadecimal format that uses only ASCII characters. 
Transfer format files may be moved between computers using ASCII mode of ftp.
The SPICE Toolkit contains utility programs (TOBIN and TOXFR) to convert from
binary to transfer format, and vice-versa.


2.2    Data Format and Definition

2.2.1    Metadata Description

A CK file should contain "comments" providing the provenance of the file. 
These metadata should describe when, why, how and by whom the file was made. 
They should detail any and all significant data gaps, and provide any similar
information that could help the end user of the CK file to select an 
appropriate CK file for some purpose, and to understand how best to use that 
file.

While providing comments is HIGHLY recommended, it is not a technical 
requirement on the CK producer.

Because many CK files do contain significant metadata, and because there are 
frequently problems with attitude data returned from a spacecraft, the user 
of CK files is STRONGLY encouraged to examine the comment area of any CK file
for possibly important metadata.

2.2.2    Data Description

The description and layout of data in a CK file is described in Reference 
Nos. 1 and 4. This information is usually not important to most users; rather
the user's view of a CK file is via the SPICELIB or CSPICE interface software
outlined in Reference 1 and also discussed in the SPICE C-Kernel tutorial.


Section 3
CK Data Access

3.1    Reading CK Files

The SPICE Toolkit contains special software (subroutines) for reading CK 
files. This is described in great detail in Reference 1 and in the C-Kernel 
tutorial. That process is briefly stated here in a Fortran example. The 
Toolkit CK Required Reading for a CSPICE version of the Toolkit contains C 
examples.


Initialization ... typically once per program run
  Tell your program which SPICE files to use ("loading" files)
   CALL FURNSH( 'lsk_file_name' )
   CALL FURNSH( 'sclk_file_name' )
   CALL FURNSH( 'ck_file_name' )

Loop ... do as often as you need
  Convert UTC to SCLK ticks
   CALL STR2ET( 'utc_string', tdb )
   CALL SCE2T ( spacecraft_id, tdb, sclkdp )

  Get orientation matrix and angular velocity at requested time
   CALL CKGPAV (instid,sclkdp,tol,'ref_frame',cmat,av,clkout,found)

The arguments are described below.

Inputs:
instid    NAIF ID for the spacecraft or structure for which the orientation 
is to be returned sclkdp    the time at which the orientation matrix and 
angular velocity are to be computed. The time system used is encoded 
spacecraft clock time (SCLK). The units are ticks since the beginning of the 
mission tol    the tolerance, expressed as number of SCLK ticks, to be used 
in searching for and computing the orientation data *ref_frame    the name of
the reference frame with respect to which the orientation is to be computed
Outputs:
cmat    the 3x3 rotation matrix that you requested
av    the angular velocity that you requested
clkout    the exact time for which the orientation and angular was computed *
found    the logical flag indicating whether the orientation and angular 
velocity data were found. Note that if the loaded CK file(s) do not contain 
angular velocity data, CKGPAV will return a FALSE found flag even when 
orientation can be computed

