PDS_VERSION_ID        = PDS3
RECORD_TYPE           = STREAM
OBJECT                = TEXT
  INTERCHANGE_FORMAT    = ASCII
  PUBLICATION_DATE      = 2000-05-25
  NOTE                  = "N/A"
END_OBJECT            = TEXT

END





Multimission Software Interface Specification (SIS)








SPICE
Spacecraft and Planet Ephemeris Kernel

SPK




NAIF Document No. 367
Version 1.0





Prepared by:  C. Acton


Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility (NAIF)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
National Aeronautics and Space Administration



ABSTRACT:  This Software Interface Specification outlines the format and
content of SPICE SPK files containing ephemeris (trajectory) data for objects
whose state (position and velocity) can be represented using the SPICE SPK
subsystem. More importantly it describes and gives examples of how to use
SPICE Toolkit software to access the data in an SPK file. This is a
multimission SIS. It can be supplemented with mission-specific additions
where needed.




CHANGE LOG


Version     Date         Page Nos.        Reason
1.0      25 May 2000      All          New multimission version.














List of Acronyms


ANSI     American National Standards Institute
ASCII     American Standard Code for Information Interchange
CCSDS     Consultative Committee on Space Data Standards
CK     SPICE C-kernel
DAF     SPICE Double Precision Array File
JPL     Caltech/Jet Propulsion Laboratory
FTP     File Transfer Protocol
FTS     SFOC File Transfer Service
MGSO     Multimission Ground Systems Office
NAIF     Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility
PDB     Project Data Base
PDS     Planetary Data System
SDT     Galileo Science Data Team
SFDU     Standard Formatted Data Unit
SIS     Software Interface Specification
SPICE     S-, P-, I-, C- and E-kernels; the principal logical data components
of a      particular NASA ancillary information system
SPK     S- and P-kernel file, the SPICE component that contains ephemeris
data for      spacecraft and/or target bodies
VMS     Digital Equipment Corporation's Virtual Memory Operating System



Section 1
General Description

1.1     Purpose of Document

This Software Interface Specification (SIS) describes the use of SPICE
Toolkit software for accessing (reading) the ephemeris data in SPICE S- and
P-ephemeris kernel (SPK) files. It also outlines the structure and contents
of SPK files, and it provides references to documents describing the details
about structure and contents.


1.2     Scope

This is a multimission SIS, applicable to all projects and processes that use
SPICE ephemeris products (SPK files).


1.3     Applicable Documents

The following reference documents are all available within each copy of the
SPICE Toolkit.

No.  Name                       NAIF Doc. No.
1   SPK Required Reading         168
2   DAF Required Reading         167
3   SPC Required Reading         211
4   NAIF Ids Required Reading    219
5   MKSPK User's Guide           357
6   BRIEF User's Guide           338
7   COMMNT User's Guide          313
8   SPACIT User's Guide          169
9   Convert User's Guide         333


Also of use are separate SPICE tutorials on reading and writing SPK files.

1.4     Functional Description

SPK files are the physical realization of two logical elements of the SPICE
system--the S-kernel (spacecraft ephemeris) and the ephemeris portion of the
P-kernel (planet, satellite, asteroid and comet ephemerides). When read using
an appropriate subroutine from the SPICE Toolkit, an SPK file will yield
state vectors--Cartesian position and velocity--of one user-specified
ephemeris object relative to another specified ephemeris object, at a
specified epoch and in a specified reference frame.

In SPICE parlance an "ephemeris object" is most typically a spacecraft,
planet, satellite, comet or asteroid. But it can also be any defined object
whose location relative to some other object is defined with data in SPK
format: additional examples are tracking station locations, landers, rovers,
and appendages on space vehicles.

To facilitate rapid information access (whether sequential or random access)
and to minimize the file size, SPK files are binary files. To allow porting
of an SPK file between computers that use different binary data
representations a "SPICE Transfer Format" is used. A transfer format SPK file
consists of hexadecimal representations of the data, using ASCII characters.

An SPK file can be structured as a CCSDS Standard Format Data Unit (SFDU)
where so required. In this case the SPK file is first converted to "SPICE
Transfer Format" before the SFDU "wrapper" is attached. SPICE Toolkit utility
programs that convert transfer format SPK files to binary format will ignore
(not be impacted by) the presence of SFDU records.

SPK files can be read with library routines provided in the SPICE Toolkit,
which is available in both ANSI FORTRAN 77 and ANSI C for most popular
platforms.


1.4.1     Data Source, Destination and Transfer Method

SPK files made for flight projects are usually produced on a Mission Design
Team or Navigation Team computer. However, any person having access to the
SPICE Toolkit or an SPK production program may produce an SPK file.

SPK files made by a flight project are typically placed in a project's
general database or on a SPICE server to allow access by a wide assortment of
customers. SPK files are transferred to the project's database or SPICE
server using file transfer protocol (ftp) or direct copy.

Since SPK files can exist in both the binary format (often named as *.bsp)
and SPICE "transfer format" (often named as *.xsp), care must be taken by the
user to determine which format file is to be transferred and then use an
appropriate transfer mechanism for that type. The user is also reminded that
binary format SPK files cannot be ported between computers using different
binary data standards; this is the reason SPK files are often stored in the
project database in SPICE transfer format.

The SPICE Toolkit includes utilities for converting SPK files between the
binary and transfer formats, and vice versa.


1.4.2     Labeling and Identification

SPK files include a "comment area" that may hold any amount of ASCII
information pertinent to the SPK file. One such use is for metadata--
information about the particular instance of an SPK file that is important to
SPK users. Refer to Applicable Document No. 3 for a detailed description of
the comment area, including Toolkit software for creating, adding, viewing,
extracting or deleting "comments".

The comment area might be used, in part, to store label information that will
subsequently be used in the construction of SFDU K-header labels or NASA
Planetary Data System (PDS) labels. Where used, the specific content and
structure of these labels will be determined by the flight project or the
PDS.

The SPK file naming convention is selected by the responsible flight project
team or other SPK producer. It is recommended that binary and transfer format
SPK file names use "*.bsp" and "*.xsp" extensions respectively.

1.4.3     Assumptions and Constraints

SPK files must be read using the SPK "reader" routines provided in the SPICE
Toolkit; no one need or should try writing their own SPK access routines.
These "reader" routines are incorporated in a user's own program, written in
a language that can access ANSI FORTRAN 77 or ANSI C routines. Refer to
Applicable Document No. 1 for a detailed discussion of how to read SPK files.

SPK files must be written using routines provided in the SPICE Toolkit
(Applicable Document No. 1) or by an existing application program designed
for this purpose. One such application is the MKSPK program (Applicable
Document No. 5). The user is advised to contact NAIF if interested in writing
SPK files.

If a user decides to define a new SPK data type, the new type must be
approved by and registered with the NAIF group at JPL. Also, at least two new
subroutines must be written and added to the Toolkit. Contact NAIF for help.

A program constructed using Toolkit software may not simultaneously read
ephemeris data from, and add new ephemeris data to, an SPK file.


Section 2
Environment

2.1     Hardware Characteristics and Limitations

In excess of 650 Kbytes of memory is required to utilize the SPICE Toolkit on
a CPU that does not provide virtual memory. A PC running DOS will not be able
to use the Toolkit. With that one exception, SPICE software should work
properly on any machine that correctly supports the ANSI FORTRAN 77 or ANSI C
standard.

The SPICE Toolkit (either FORTRAN or C) has been built and tested on numerous
platforms. It normally is delivered with all included library and program
modules built and ready to use. In some cases the delivery script provided
with the Toolkit goes through a complete build process.


2.2     Interface Medium and Characteristics

An SPK file must be in the local binary format to be accessed by SPICE
Toolkit "reader" software.

SPK files are sometimes converted into the SPICE transfer format, and where
required, structured as SFDUs, before being transferred to another computer.
Any text transfer mechanism may be used in this case, such as ASCII mode of
ftp. If the file is to be transferred between two computers that use
identical binary data representations then a binary transfer method may be
used (an example is ftp, set to operate in binary mode). As an example, Sun,
Hewlett Packard (HP), Silicon Graphics (SGI), Macintosh and NeXT computers
all use the same (IEEE) binary standard, whereas PCs running Windows, PCs
running Linux, DEC Alphas running VMS and DEC Alphas running Digital Unix
each use different, incompatible binary standards.


2.3     Deformatting

If the SPK file is received in the SPICE transfer format it must first be
converted to local binary format using a SPICE utility program (TOBIN or
SPACIT, Applicable Document No. 9) or an appropriate SPICELIB or CSPICE
routine, available in the SPICE Toolkit. If the transfer format file is
wrapped with SFDU records, these will be ignored (skipped) by the SPICE
Toolkit's TOBIN and SPACIT utilities starting with version N0050 of the SPICE
Toolkit. (Earlier versions of TOBIN and SPACIT will not skip over SFDU
wrappers; in this case the user must remove the SFDU using other means.)


2.4     Calling Sequence

SPK files are read using one of several "reader" routines provided in the
SPICE Toolkit. See Attachment 2 for a full discussion of the readers
available.

A program may access one or several SPK files at run time simply by using
multiple SPK file load directives within the program. Some compilers restrict
the total number of open files for a given process. SPICE software contains a
parameter restricting the total number of open files to 20 to be within the
lowest known bound on this constraint.


2.5     End-Of-File Convention

SPK files are terminated with the normal end of file convention of the
computer on which they are produced.


2.6     Utility Programs

The TOXFR and TOBIN utilities may be used to convert a binary SPK to transfer
format and transfer format SPK to binary, respectively. The SPACIT program
(Applicable Document No. 8) may also be  used to convert SPK files back and
forth between binary and SPICE transfer formats, although TOXFR and TOBIN are
generally easier to use.

The BRIEF (Applicable Document No. 6) and SPACIT utilities may be used to
summarize the contents and time coverage of a binary format SPK file.

The COMMNT program (Applicable Document No. 7) may be used to add comments
to, extract comments from, delete comments in or view comments in a binary
format SPK file. SPACIT may also be used to view any comments.

Section  3
Data Flow Characteristics

3.1     Operational Characteristics

3.1.1     Generation Method and Frequency

For JPL and some other flight projects NAIF provides a complete SPK
generation program set to the Navigation Team or other group responsible for
generating SPK files. SPK files are generated on a schedule determined by
project requirements.


3.1.2     Time Span of Product

The time span for each SPK file is determined by the producer of that file.
Some degree of consistency may be maintained for SPK files produced by a
particular flight project for a specific purpose. For example, a navigation
team might regularly produce "archival" SPK files spanning a period of seven
days and "predict" SPK files spanning a period of two months.

While not a requirement, the start and stop times of each SPK file could be
included with other pertinent descriptive information about the file in the
comment area of the file. For those projects using SFDUs these times will
also be included in the SFDU K-Header.


3.2     Data Volume

The size of an SPK file is determined principally by the time span of the
file, the number of ephemeris objects included in the file, and the SPK data
type(s) used in the file. Estimated SPK file sizes for several example
applications are shown in Table 3-1. The size of a transfer format SPK file
is about 2.5 to 3 times the size of the corresponding binary SPK file.


Example Application
Estimated Size
Galileo cruise during the Earth-I flyby:  Archive file of 380 days duration
containing data for the Galileo spacecraft, Gaspra asteroid, Earth, Moon,
Earth-moon barycenter and sun
0.6 Mbytes
MGS during mapping phase: Archive file of 7 days duration containing data for
the MO spacecraft, Mars, Phobos, Deimos, Mars barycenter, Earth, Earth-moon
barycenter and sun
3.7 Mbytes
Cassini tour: Advance planning file using data derived from patched conic
element sets, covering 2004 Nov 8 to 2008 Jun 30 and containing data for only
the Cassini spacecraft.
25 Mbytes
Note: sizes shown are for transfer format SPK files. Once received at a
user's site and converted to the local binary format required by the SPICE
Toolkit "readers", an SPK file will be reduced in size by a factor of
approximately 2.5 to 3.

Table 3-1
Examples of SPK File Size
Section 4
Detailed Data Object Definition

4.1     Structure and Organization Overview

SPK files may be delivered to a project database in transfer format or in
binary format. If transfer format is used, the file may or may not be encased
in SFDU wrappers. If binary format is used, which binary form must be known
to the end user.

If an SFDU version of an SPK file has been received, use an SFDU stripper
tool to strip off leading and trailing SFDU-specific records, leaving a SPICE
transfer format SPK file. If using SPICE Toolkit version N0050 or later the
TOBIN and SPACIT tools ignore the SFDU wrappers when converting a transfer
format SPK file to binary format.

If a SPICE transfer format SPK file has been received, or once SFDU
structures have been removed as described above, use the NAIF Toolkit utility
program TOBIN or SPACIT to convert the transfer format SPK file to the local
binary format. This is a straight forward process requiring no knowledge of
SPK file structures or host computer conventions for text or binary files.


4.2     Data Format and Definition

The next sections provide an introduction to the structure of SPK files.
Specific structure details and specification of the contents are found in the
appendices as noted.

Under most circumstances those who intend only to read an SPK file need
understand few if any structure details: the user's interface to an SPK file
is through SPICE Toolkit subroutine argument lists. Examples of this
interface are found in Applicable Document No. 1.


4.2.1     Transfer Format SPK Format Description

A description of the transfer format SPK file is not provided since this
format is used only to facilitate file porting. Use the TOBIN or SPACIT
utility program to convert a transfer format SPK file to local binary format
for use in your application programs.


4.2.3     Binary SPK Format Description

Ignoring host-specific file control components and architecture details, a
binary SPK file is structured as shown in Figure 4-2.

     +------------------------+
     |     |
     |      Comment area     |
     |------------------------|
     |     |
     |     Ephemeris data     |
     |     |
     +------------------------+
                                              Figure 4-2
                                      Binary SPK File Structure


Details about this structure, and examples of using the Toolkit "readers"
(subroutines) to access the data in an SPK file, are found in Applicable
Document No. 1. The size of this document may be intimidating. However, it is
not particularly difficult reading and it is filled with practical examples.
Novice SPK users may model their code after these examples. Several SPICE
Toolkit "cookbook" programs (STATES or SIMPLE) provide working examples of
code designed to read SPK files.

The comment area may be used to hold metadata describing how and why the
particular SPK file was created. Details about the comment area, including
how to use Toolkit software to read it, write to it, extract it, delete it or
view it are found in Applicable Document Nos. 3 and 7.

The ephemeris data found in SPK files can be provided in any of a variety of
different forms--called SPK Data Types. Some examples of these SPK data types
are:

  Modified difference arrays
  Chebyshev polynomials
  Two-body conic elements
  Space Command "Two-line elements"
  Lagrange interpolation of discrete state vectors
  Hermite interpolation of discrete state vectors
  Precessing ellipse conic elements

The common element in all of these SPK data types is that, with the
appropriate evaluator from SPICELIB or CSPICE, they all yield a state vector
for an ephemeris object at a time requested by the user.

SPK ephemeris data, such as the polynomials or conic elements mentioned
above, are stored in a data structure called a Double Precision Array File
(DAF). Complete specifications for DAFs are found in Applicable Document No.
2. Anyone needing a detailed understanding of the SPK file structure and the
most fundamental (low level) Toolkit subroutines for working with SPK files
should read this document.

SPK files use a numeric code to identify ephemeris objects--spacecraft,
planets, satellites, comets and asteroids. A listing of these codes and the
objects to which they pertain is found in Applicable Document No. 4.

